+++
title = "About Me"
description = "A little background for the curious"
date = "2014-04-09"
+++

Living in the Raleigh-Durham area, I work as a PHP developer at [Research
Square](http://researchsquare.com).  In addition to my full time job, I also
own [Tortugas Consulting, LLC](http://tortugas-llc.com).

I share my life with my wonderful wife Whitney and two beautiful daughters,
Madeline and Emily.

## My Values

I have always loved learning.  A large portion of my free time is spent
pursuing a deeper understanding of core design principles, application
architecture patterns, and researching various technologies.  No matter how
much I learn, I am never satisfied with what I have accomplished.  There is
always the desire to push my skills one step further.

Work ethic is extremely important to me, and something I take immense pride in.
In an era where the older values are slipping away, I strive at all times to
maintain a consistent, unwavering adherence to the principles on which I was
raised.  My previous employers, as well as my clients, have all commented on
how well this shines through.

## Desires

While I do spend as much time as possible refining my skills at home, I really
want to work with a team of seasoned developers where I can continue to grow my
knowledge base.  My ideal job would be working at a place where testing is a
focus, not an afterthought, and continual education for the team is a must.
Large scale data and deploying code used by thousands of people would be a
dream come true.

Even though I may not currently possess all the experience necessary to "run
with the big dogs", I am confident my eagerness to learn, coupled with my
proven ability to quickly pick up new technologies, makes me well suited for
any position.
